being foreign secretary and the chief
scientific adviser good afternoon
welcome to Downing Street for today's
coronavirus press briefing I'm joined by
our chief scientific adviser Sir Patrick
valance and dr. Yvonne Doyle medical
director at public health England before
Sir Patrick provides an update on the
latest data from our cobra correct
coronavirus dashboard I just want to
give you an update on the steps that we
as a government have been taken to
defeat coronavirus our step-by-step
action plan is aiming to slow the spread
of the virus so fewer people need
hospital treatment at any one time
thereby protecting the NHS is capacity
at each point we've been following the
scientific and medical advice and we've
been very deliberate in our actions
taking the right steps at the right
moment we're also taking unprecedented
action to increase NHS capacity by
dramatically expanding the numbers of
beds key staff life-saving equipment on
the frontline so that we give people the
care they need when they need it most
that's why we're instructing people to
stay at home so we can protect our NHS
and save lives I can report that through
the government's ongoing monitoring and
testing programme as of today 134
thousand nine hundred and forty six
people have now been tested for the
virus a hundred and twelve thousand
eight hundred and five have tested
negative twenty two thousand one hundred
and forty one have tested positive of
those who have contracted the virus
1408 have very sadly died we express our
deepest condolences to the families and
friends of those of those who have
passed away and I think those figures
are a powerful reminder to us all of the
importance of following the government's
guidelines we must stay at home to
protect our NHS and save lives and I'd
like to thank all of those involved on
the frontline in particular all of those
in the NHS for their battle against this
virus the amazing doctors
the amazing nurses all the support staff
working day and night the thousands of
other key workers from our teachers to
supermarket workers to our fantastic
diplomatic network who are all as a team
working around the clock to get us
through this unprecedented coronavirus
challenge this is a united national
effort and the spirit of selflessness
shown by so many is an inspiration I now
want to turn to what we've been doing to
support British people traveling around
the world coronavirus hasn't just
challenges at home it is the greatest
global challenge in a generation and as
the country's work to secure their
borders and stop the further spread of
this deadly virus we appreciate that an
unprecedented number of UK travelers are
trying to get home and we're not talking
a few hundred even a few thousands we're
talking about hundreds of thousands of
people travelling around the world so
with that in mind on the 17th of March
we advised people against all
non-essential traveled around the world
and since the 23rd of March we've
advised that all all UK residents who
were currently travelling abroad should
return home hundreds of thousands have
already done so but many travelers
haven't yet managed to get back home
from young backpackers to couples
on cruises and we appreciate the
difficult predicament that they find
themselves in we also recognize exactly
the anxiety of families here in the UK
who are concerned to get their loved
ones home it's a worrying time for all
of those who have been affected and I
want to assure them that this government
their government is working around the
clock to support advise and to help
British travellers get home
I've spoken to more than 20 foreign
ministers around the world in the last
week or so to support this effort to
keep airports and ports open and to
facilitate access to them by British
travelers over the weekend I spoke to
foreign ministers from Australia New
Zealand India and Brazil and packaged
daang and also spoke to the Ethiopian
Prime Minister and in all of those cases
urged them to work with us to come to
keep commercial roots flying given the
scale and complexity of this challenge
it inevitably requires a team effort so
the foreign office is working with other
governments there's a particular focus
on transit hubs and we're also working
with the airlines to keep as many
flights running as possible we've got a
lot more to do but we've already helped
hundreds of thousands of Britons get
home
the first priority has been to keep as
many commercial flights running as we
can and that's based on just purely the
the scale and the number of people who
want to come home and as a result of
those efforts and the corporation we
received from the Spanish government
we've enabled an estimated 150,000 UK
nationals to get back from Spain on
other commercial routes that have come
under pressure we work with partner
governments and airlines to get back
8500 UK travelers from Morocco around
5,000 UK nationals from Cyprus that
gives you a sense of the scale of the
challenge and the numbers of British
travelers abroad now in circumstances
where commercial flights can't operate
we've already chartered flights which
proved necessary to return 1400 UK
nationals on flights for example from
from China at the outset of this crisis
and more recently from Peru
we've not faced challenges like this in
getting people home from abroad on this
scale in recent memory airports are
closing down or preventing Airlines from
operating on a commercial basis local
authorities have placed restrictions on
movement that prevent people from
getting to the airport and the critical
transit hubs that we rely on for
long-haul flights are also shutting down
or in some cases limiting their flights
some of these restrictions have been
done with very little notice some with
no notice at all which makes it very
difficult to respond so international
collaboration is absolutely vital as I
said it's a team effort and it involves
government working with
governments but also working with the
airlines so with that in mind I can
today announce a new arrangement between
the government and Airlines to fly home
tens of thousands of stranded British
travelers where commercial flights are
no longer possible partner airlines
include British Airways Virgin easyJet
jet - and Titan and this list can be
expanded under the arrangements that we
are putting in place we will target
flights from a range of priority
countries starting this week and let me
explain a little bit about how this will
work in practice where commercial routes
remain an option Airlines will be
responsible for getting passengers home
that means offering alternative flights
at little to no cost where routes have
been cancelled and it means allowing
passengers to change tickets including
between carriers so for those still in
those countries where commercial options
are still available don't wait don't run
the risk of getting stranded the
airlines are standing by to help you
please book your tickets as soon as
possible where commercial flights are no
longer running the government will
provide the necessary financial support
for special charter flights to bring UK
nationals back home once special charter
flights have been arranged we will
promote them through the government's
travel advice and by the British Embassy
or High Commission in the relevant
country British travellers who want a
seat on those flights will book and pay
directly through a dedicated travel
management company we've designated 75
million pounds to support those flights
and the airlines in order to keep the
cost down and affordable for those
seeking to return to the UK and in
arranging these flights our priority
will be the most vulnerable including
the elderly or those with particularly
pressing medical needs and also looking
in particular at countries where we've
got large numbers of UK tour is
struggling to get home
UK travellers if they haven't already
done so should check the Foreign Office
travel advice and that advice is under
constant review and it can help
travelers find out more details about
how to access
the flights under this arrangement they
should also follow the social media of
the UK Embassy or High Commission in the
country where they find themselves so
that they can be directed to accurate
real-time information from the local
authorities for any questions that can't
be advice answered in that travel advice
or by the UK Embassy's or High
Commission we also have our call center
working 24 hours a day seven days a week
now I know it's been difficult to get
through for some travelers just to give
you a sense of the sheer volume on
average we normally receive a thousand
calls a day to that call centre last
Tuesday we had nearly 15,000 the highest
on record so we boosted our resources
we've redeployed people to assist in the
call center and we've tripled our
capacity yesterday the call centre
answered 99 percent of calls and helped
thousands of British travelers to get
the answers that they need so for those
stranded off for families nervously
waiting news and wanting to see their
loved ones return home we're doing
everything we can we've improved our
advice and boosted the call centre so
travelers get better and swifter
information we've put in place this
arrangement with the airlines so that we
can reach more British citizens in
vulnerable circumstances abroad where
commercial flights aren't running and
we're working intensively
around-the-clock with all of our partner
countries and governments around the
world to keep it open the airports the
ports and the flights to bring people
home we've not faced an international
challenge quite like this before but
together we're going to rise to it and
of course here at home we can all
support our NHS by continuing to follow
the guidance to stay at home protect our
NHS and save lives
I think I'll now hand over to Patrick
balance who will give a presentation on
the latest data and then we'll take some
questions after that so thank you very
much I wanted to share with you some of
the information about where we are in
this outbreak and some of the measures
that have been taken and the idea as
we've said repeatedly is to try and
break and slow transmission
of the virus and that's through staying
at home and keeping distant so the first
slide shows that actually this has been
successful in terms of the behavior
changes and I want to thank everybody
for the way in which everyone is
adhering to the measures that have been
put in place this shows the use of
transport over time from the end of
February through to now and you can see
a dramatic fall-off in the use of the
London tube down to just a few percent
of what it was back in the end of
February a decrease in bus use a
decrease in national rail and a decrease
also in the use of all motor vehicles so
the measures are in place they are
making a difference they aren't
decreasing the contact which is so
important to spread the disease and
we're doing a good job at cutting that
down now the reason that's important is
because of course it then prevents the
number of cases should reduce the number
of cases next slide please
so this shows the number of new UK cases
and I'll repeat what I've said before
this is cases that are detected with a
positive test so it's an underestimate
of the total number of cases and it's
those cases which have been tested
because they've come to hospital what
you can see is there's been an increase
in the number of cases since the middle
of March through to today we expect that
the measures that are in place that have
caused that social distancing the stay
at home message will be reducing the
number of cases of transmission in the
community and decreasing the number of
cases overall as the case is flattened
off and we shouldn't take too much
attention to individual day to day
variation we need to look over time and
see what's happening we would expect
this in turn to decrease the number of
people needing admission to hospital
next slide please
this graph shows the total number of
people admitted to hospital since the
middle of March which is now 8,000
people with coronavirus that's gone up
pretty much the same amount each day for
the last few days that shows that it's
not in an increasing amount but going up
in a constant amount which may suggest
that we're already beginning to see some
effects through about half of those
cases slightly under half are in London
but what you can see in the lower lines
on this graph is that we're also seeing
cases throughout the UK
so the message stay at home protect the
NHS and save lives is true everywhere in
the UK we all need to do this in order
to break and slow the transmission of
this virus decrease the number of cases
and in turn decrease the number of
people coming into hospital what I've
said recently is that we expect this to
get worse over the next couple of weeks
because there's a lag phase between
getting the disease and people turning
up in hospital so we would expect to see
a continuation of this at least over two
or three weeks then a stabilization and
a gradual decrease thereafter the number
of hospital admissions to repeat has
gone up roughly the same amount each day
suggesting that we're not on a fast
acceleration at the moment next slide
please
all of this is about preventing deaths
and preventing the NHS becoming
overwhelmed in the intensive care units
with ventilators and on this graph it
tracks the deaths that have occurred
globally across some some of the
countries not all of the countries
obviously and it shows that there is a
pattern of increasing deaths which you
expect to plateau reach a plateau to
come down eventually and you can see in
the UK here which is in the purple line
we're tracking roughly along the same
path as France I've said before we're
behind Italy in terms of the curve you
can see that Spain has a higher number
than Italy at the moment in terms of its
trajectory not in terms of the total
number but the direction in which it's
going the UK is tracking alongside
France in this the measures we're taking
will stop the transmission delay the
transmission reduce the number of cases
that reduce the number of people
becoming infected in the community
reduce the number of people therefore
that need to go onto ventilators and
therefore reduce the number of people
also that might die or will die from
this infection so I want to thank all of
the people in the NHS who working
unbelievably hard at the frontline to
look after this what we can do what all
of us can do is make sure that we heed
the advice to stay at home to reduce
those contacts so that we ultimately
decrease the number of people who are
going to be seriously ill or dying from
this infection
thank you very much Patrick and it will
turn to questions now his Lord couldn't
smoke there and thank you for a
secretary first off sir patrick based on
what you know now are the restrictions
working and could we avoid the NHS being
overwhelmed as the trajectory continues
like this and foreign secretary you're
asking a huge amount of the public is
that the government's view that people
need to be willing to follow these
restrictions for as long as six months
if that's what it takes should I start
whether the trajectory what we know is
that the measures that have been taken
are having a very big effect on contacts
and I showed you the data on transport
you can see dramatic reductions in the
amount of transport being used
you see dramatic reductions in footfall
we know of course that things like
restaurants and pubs which are places
where people aggregate have been been
closed so we are seeing a big change in
contacts that is predicted to have a
very significant effect on the so called
are the r-value is the number of people
on average infected by one infected
person and the idea is to get that
number below one at which point the
epidemic stops and starts to go down on
the basis of the contacts you would
expect that our value now in terms of
the early phases of transmission in the
community to be coming down or below one
so that we think that that has had the
effect that's that's desired that takes
two or three weeks to feed through into
the number of people who might be
appearing in hospital a little longer in
terms of those who are seriously ill
all those of course that might die so we
expect to see a lag phase before you
really see these curves changing I'll
also make a comment about the duration
it's important that we do this now to
get the numbers below NHS ICU capacity
that is the absolute priority at the
moment once that is achieved once we
know that we've got this curve below the
ICU capacity and stable then of course
it's time to art start asking the
question which is being asked across the
world at the moment how do we release
those measures and manage this going
forward so I think it's premature to put
a time an absolute time on how long's
long this goes on for we need to do
phase one and then we need to think
about how we release these in the right
way and a right approach in order to be
able to allow the curve to stay below
the ICU capacity and I think the only
thing Lord that our dad is that
obviously the more members the public as
they're doing increasingly follow this
guidance the quicker we'll be able to
get into a position where we review
whether and how there is any easing of
those restrictions beth Rigby from Sky
thank you a question first up Patrick
on Friday the NHS chief said there were
6,200 coronavirus patients in hospital
today he said it was 9,000 that's nearly
a thousand new patients a day do you
think those numbers will accelerate over
the next two to three weeks and at what
stage at the moment do you think the NHS
could hit capacity and then just a quick
question for the foreign secretary
please Germany's testing 70,000 people a
day countries like South Korea are doing
mass testing and contact tracing to try
and control the spread of coronavirus
our target is 25 thousand tests a day is
that because you think that number is
optimal or rather is it that we can't
get our hands on the equipment because
other countries have being faster out of
the blocks to answer the question about
the numbers so 6,000
9,000 roughly of a thousand a day going
up in that in that measure that's not an
acceleration it's quite important and
and it tells you that actually this is a
bit more stable than it has been I do
expect that number to continue I expect
the number of people coming every day to
be about that it may get up a little bit
and then in two or three weeks you would
expect that to stabilize and then to
start to go down a bit but it's
important that's not a rapidly
acceleration number it's an important
number it's a very difficult number to
deal with and it's a number that the NHS
staff are clearly coping with in terms
of what they're doing at the moment and
the numbers as projected are designed as
the chief medical officer has said to
keep this below the ICU capacity you
can't promise and I certainly wouldn't
promise that every single ICU is never
going to breach its number because that
happens every winter but the aim is to
try and keep that below across the
country and that's what we're shooting
for that's what the numbers suggest we
should achieve there or there abouts and
that's what we need to keep striving for
it's why it's so important that we
continue to stop the transmission in the
community because that keeps the numbers
down going into that critical stage that
is that we are operating on multiple
fronts to increase the testing that
includes purchasing more tests it also
means the progress we've been making
bringing former NHS staff back into the
workforce or we want to scale that up as
swiftly as possible but it's got to be
reliable I think it was the chief
medical officer that said one thing
worse than no test is a bad test so
we've got to do this in a safe way as of
this morning over 900 NHS frontline
staff have been tested as part of our
new testing scheme and we'll be rapidly
expanding that Auntie Belle from Channel
five thank you
question for the foreign secretary first
of all do you worry that in some parts
of the country police forces are
interpreting the instructions from
government shall we say overzealously
and maybe encroaching a little bit too
much on the way people maybe want to
exercise take there one piece of
exercise a day for instance question for
dr. Doyle as a health service
professional are you concerned that
we're still seeing lots of examples on
social media of people in the front line
of the NHS who feel that they simply
don't have the correct PPE that they
should have you must be worried about
that and a final question for Sir
Patrick are you thinking about adding
the symptoms of loss of taste and smell
as symptoms that might be appointed
towards people having the virus thank
you so on the protective equipment and
there has been a huge amount of material
delivered to the hospitals and clinics
on the frontline 170 million items and
over this weekend is certainly an
acknowledgment that people need more of
this sir tens of millions of the
equivalent the right equipment has been
delivered as well and will continue to
be and getting supplies to the frontline
is absolutely critical to ensure that
people feel safe
it comes alongside a refresh of the
guidance to ensure the people are clear
what equipment should be used in what
circumstances and that is very active at
the moment and just on the question you
asked me about police forces look I've
got huge admiration for the incredible
job all of our emergency services are
doing including the police obviously we
need some common sense in the way some
of though the way that that is
approached on the other hand let's also
bear in mind the number one thing the
number one message which the police are
rightly trying to convey in my view is
that people need to follow the guidance
not just the letter but also to the
spirit that is the way we tackle this
challenge and get through it quicker and
as quickly as possible so I fully
support the police in what they're
trying to achieve actually the symptoms
that the chief medical officer is
outlined as being the ones that the ones
that you self isolate on are persistent
new cough and
of all fever all fever loss of taste and
smell is something that can happen with
other respiratory viruses as well it
does seem to be a feature of this from
what people are reporting and it is
something that obviously people should
take into account as they think about
their symptoms I think it's really for
the chief medical officers to decide at
what point if any the diagnostic change
takes place in terms of self isolation
and those symptoms that we're learning
about for this disease are the ones that
you know we're going to get more
information on overtime but new
persistent cough or fever captures the
vast majority of people with this with
this illness Gordon Raynor from The
Daily Telegraph please thank you foreign
secretary just just to pick up on Andy's
question Lord sumption the former
Supreme Court Justice suggested today
that some areas of the country are
turning into a police state so will the
government issue further guidance on
what the police should or shouldn't find
people for so the ordinary members of
the public don't get criminalized for
shopping for the wrong thing or taking a
breather on on a park bench can I also
ask you as it's your first press
conference since the China issue has
come up do you do you believe like some
of your colleagues apparently do that
China should or will face a reckoning
when all this is over and just lastly a
question for Sir Patrick can I ask you
sir Patrick have reliable are the
official figures on the number of deaths
from corona virus that we're seeing
Downing Street submitted today that
there is a lag in the figures we're told
but some of the figures that are coming
out are up to two weeks old in some
cases and the ONS is going to be putting
our figures tomorrow on how many people
have died who aren't in hospital so have
we only been given part of the truth so
far so just as I said already on the
police of course we back the police
doing a very difficult job in
unprecedented circumstances surely of
course there needs to be common sense in
the way some that guidance is
interpreted but overall the overriding
message that we want to convey to the
British public and I think the police
are rightly trying to convey
is that we need to all be following the
letter and the spirit of that guidance
and that's the way we could tell this
virus and we get through this challenge
as quickly as possible
on China look that at home here in terms
of tackling this coronavirus crisis
challenge we need to come together as a
team
internationally we need to bring as many
countries together if we're going to
collaborate effectively in tackling this
crisis and stopping further waves we had
good cooperation with the Chinese
government in terms of repatriating UK
nationals for Wuhan
but obviously after the crisis has
abated I think the time will be right to
conduct a kind of lessons learnt and I'm
sure the World Health Organization will
be at the forefront of that in answer to
the question about deaths yes there's a
lag in the data there's a lag in the
data I think the CMO has expressed this
before in terms of verifying exactly the
time and the cause of death and making
sure that all of that side of things is
accurate because you get presumed and
then you get confirmed in terms of the
virus so yes there's a lag in the data
and there'll always be some lag and I
think the NHS and public are things are
working very hard to sort of close that
gap and make sure that the lag is as
short as possible and ons I've been
speaking to the national statistician
and the ons data will pick up also those
people who didn't die in hospital but
may have died from corona virus in the
community so that will lead to some
extra numbers on top of that don't
expect those to be large and it's
important going forward that we have
this reconciliation between all of the
numbers been guys from the Daily Mirror
thank you foreign secretary and the
Daily Mirror is campaigning to give a
medal to our brave NHS workers and staff
on the front line fighting this virus
will you back that campaign today
I think the job they're doing is amazing
inspirational we've all talked about it
from these podiums and of course they
deserve all the tributes and all the
recognition I'm sure we want to look
very carefully about how we do that once
we've got the other side of this crisis
this piper from Reuters
I I just wanted to ask a very specific
question on antibody testing when will
these tests actually be rolled out and
what will the testing regime look like
we'll be able people be able to take
them at home will every special station
set up where people can do this and how
widely available will they be and
foreign secretary one more question if I
may
since the Prime Minister and health
secretary of testing positive
coronavirus can I inquire about your
health how you feeling I'm feeling
terrific thank you very much and the
Prime Minister chaired the 9:15 meeting
and was full of vigor and giving us the
leadership we need and we're a united
cabinet team in turn in terms of getting
the country through this crisis I will
on your technical question on the
testing defer to Yvonne doll Thank You
Secretary of State so testing is a
crucial part of our strategy to deal
with this epidemic and there are a
number of strands and we've heard one
mentioned already here which is the
25,000 tests per day that public health
England and the NHS are well on the way
to meeting by the mid to late April now
there are a number of others and you've
mentioned one which is the antibody
testing this at the moment is under
investigation it is a test that is novel
it would be a point-of-care testing so
it would be done in the place it could
be done for instance in the home and it
could be done at scale but and I would
come back to the statement that the
chief medical officer made which is this
one thing worse than a no test is a bad
test and this testing needs to be
evaluated to make sure it's valid in
other words it does what it says and
that you know at scale and this would be
large numbers we want to make sure that
we're doing something that's safe and
that is actually valid that it is
correct when it is read thank you very
much
you
[Music]